If
you've got a black officer out here and he gets
involved in a scuffle with somebody and his
matchstick slips and hits him across the forehead
and they bleed like a stuffed pig,
NAACP will not take or pursue a complaint of police
brutality against a black officer. period.
If it was a white officer
involved in the same action,
the NAACP and their
representatives would scream to high heaven,
build a corps, provide demonstration marches and
the whole bit, trying to get this officer not only
fired, But put my penitentiary.
Your
ACLU, American Civil Liberties Union, operates
on the same theory that if a person's civil rights
are violated, they will go to any extreme to
guarantee that that person's civil rights and all
of society's civil rights be guaranteed or
punishment or retribution for a violation of
them. But if it involves a policeman, they won't
take a case defending a policeman or trying to
improve his civil rights or guarantee that he even
has a civil right.
Reason being that
they want issues that involve publicity. They
want the publicity so that they can get the
financial donations to perpetuate the ACLU. The
cases involving the policemen don't generate any
favorable publicity.
Situations like that tend to make you hesitate
doing your job. It
gives you the attitude that people are going to get
what they're doing to pay for it. You get cynical as
hell.
In the past, a policeman would be, as the
understanding goes, involved in police action,
take police action and solve a case or put an end to a
disturbance at the scene. Now he writes a piece of
paper and does
nothing. A similar train of thought there. What
kind of impact did affirmative action programs
have for Fort Worth and the police department?
Quite a bit.
In hiring,
the police department don't hire its people. All
the city employees go through the personnel
office. the city personnel office, and then are
sent to where a vacancy exists. So every applicant
has been pre-screened and pre-tested by the
personnel office before you ever see them
on the final job site or final employer or
interview or whatever you want to call it. They
send you a list of names, and you make your own
appointments for them.
You cannot accept or reject any of the applicants.
You can tell the personnel office what you want,
and they will notify you. The personnel office is
not interested at all in who you hire, but they want
to know a justifiable legal reason for everyone
you turn down.
And it better fit within the affirmative action
rules.
You can't say you're hiring this one because this
one has more experience or this one will be a better
employee. They want the reason for turning them
down. Then give them down who you hire.
Do you
think it affects the effectiveness of the police
department in the long run? If it affects the
quality of your personnel, sure it does. And it
does affect the quality of your personnel because
instead of hiring ten people out here that are
broad, well-rounded, physical, capable, people
you hire three that are minorities simply because
they are minorities and they fit in the category uh
you give them special grades on all of their
interviews so it's going to affect your overall
effectiveness
and this letter you mentioned uh You didn't give me
a year, but I'm assuming it was late 60s, early 70s.
You had an officer killed by a young black sniper.
How does something like this affect the
interactions you had with blacks on the street, or
does it? It affected them real strong at that time.
in the period of time between
the incident when it occurred and the later
apprehension of the sniper, I forget what the time
was, a month, six weeks, we said what time,
the police officers naturally take their own
protection first
and at the expense of appearance what i'm getting
at is at say a traffic stop where you stop somebody
running stop sign and you walk up to the car and ask
to see if i have a license in preparation for
writing them a ticket to run the stop sign at that
time they'd walk up to the car carrying a loaded cop
shotgun They wouldn't walk up with a pencil in
their hand and a ticket book in the other. They'd
walk up asking the driver's license with a shotgun
in their hand. Yeah, it affects you, how you feel,
how you act, because you don't know who you're
talking
to. What do you think the reaction is? Well, this is
a hypothetical question. What kind of reaction do
you think it would have been if instead of a black
guy it had been a drugged out hippie? Would that
have changed the way the force reacted? At that
time, there was no such thing as a drugged out
hippie. That came later.
It was prior to the drug culture. Okay, I'm trying
to aim that question. If it had just been a, oh,
okay. What I'm trying to get at is if it had been a
white or an Asian, if it had been somebody else,
would that have affected the same way? I mean, with
tension, with anything like that, do tensions
rise regardless of who it is? I mean, look, to give
you an example, Several years later, this would be
approximately 10 years ago. It would be about 76, I
imagine. We had an incident on the west side where
we had a black walking down the street shooting a
pistol. Broad daylight.
Two cars were sent, both of them one-man cars. One
officer pulled up. He knew the Black. He was a
middle case. He knew him. He had talked with him
before. Instead of waiting for his backup unit to
get there, he called for him to come over and sit in
the car. The man did.
What happened in that car, I don't know. Nobody
ever knows for sure, but we're guessing.
The pistol The black was carrying mud off and
killed the policeman. He was white. He was a
policeman with about 28 years experience.
When the other car got there, which was less than
two or three blocks away at the time,
The black jumped out of the car and ran to the other
car, hollering for help, because this officer had
been shot. There was no department-wide hard
feelings toward blacks incident.
There was no big public sentiment for or against.
It was a policeman that had, for some
reason, had violated departmental policy in that
he hadn't waited for it back up yet to get there with
him. The black was a middle case. Been in and out of
the hospital a number of times. But Jesse knew it.
He'd talk with him, knew his nickname, where he
lived. His habit was getting out in the backyard,
shoot that pistol up in the air till it was empty,
and then go back in the house. He did this every
week. And Jesse was. But when Jesse was killed,
there wasn't any big set society, the department,
the individual going to the department was upset
about it. Why the difference between the two
incidents? Why the difference in the reaction?
One was a deliberate,
planned incident. The other was an unavoidable
accident.
Early on in your career, you work in Youth Division
1. What did this job involve? In Texas,
children under the age of 10 are not deemed
capable of making a legal decision.
Juveniles from the age of 10 to 17 are and can be held
responsible for their actions. Any offense that
they commit either against themselves or against
society
was handled by the youth police.
We also handled Registration of bicycles.
Licensing bicycles at that time were not anymore.
Runaways. This type of
service. Thanks. Well, I guess now I'm going to get
asked, what was the most common thing? It handled a
diversity. In the youth division? Shoplifting,
theft, and runaways. What age, or what's the most
common age for, you know, describe a typical
problem you face? It's hard to describe typical.
Eleven-year-old white boy pimping two girls. One
eleven, one twelve. Is he typical?
Or the boy that gets a bad report about the first six
weeks of school, don't want to go home, so he's
turned into a runaway.
The kid that got a bicycle for Christmas, he can't
get out riding it without a registration or a
license tag on it, because he don't know the
difference. This one's typical. A girl that goes
to the store and shoplifts a tube of lipstick,
because she don't have one that color.
How would you say the kids
today compare to the kids that you work with then?
Think they're pretty much the same? I think the
drug influence has made a lot of change. I don't
know what happened in that field. I can't say, but
I'm afraid that it has. Like what? more than taking
drugs, experimenting with drugs,
committing offenses to get money to buy drugs,
being on drugs and under the effect of them. The
main thing we had then that could be considered
drugs would be alcohol or hallucinations. if it's
kept up will kill you. Alcohol, if it's kept up for
an extreme will kill you. But not to the extent that
drugs
are used now. Okay. Ah,
here's the one we were talking about earlier. In
1966, the Supreme Court ruled in the Randy case
that a suspect has to be informed of their rights
when they're arrested. About the same time, they
ruled in the Mapp case that you can't have legal
search warrant that specifies what you're after.
How do these rulings affect your work?
of the effect if you are a patrol officer and
you are patrolling out here on the midnight shift
and you see a car go by with two people sitting in it
the back end nearly dragging the ground driving
down the street obeying every traffic law you can
think of Why would you want to stop that car?
Because that son of a bitch carried something
stolen in the back end of that thing. Otherwise, he
wouldn't be dragging the bottom like that. How are
you going to justify searching the back end of that
car to see what he stole? Yes, it affects your work.
You've got to find him in some kind of a violation.
strong enough where you can put him in jail over a
lieutenant's objection to give you the right to
search that car under the guise of being
inventorying the property of the car before you
put it in the PD panel.
Yeah. Do you think... Take your average policeman
or you. Do you think that things like the Miranda
warning and the restrictions on searches, do you
think those are good in the fact that they may
protect an individual or bad in the fact that they
may hinder enforcement? They hinder
enforcement.
I don't agree with the theory that society should
be burdened with the expense of furnishing a
high-priced lawyer to somebody that has been
charged with committing an offense. I don't think
that's society's burden.
I don't necessarily agree with the idea that he
should be told everything that he says can and may
be used against
him. By law, he should be a grown man and he should be
held accountable for his actions, period.
I
don't agree with the requirement for a warrant.
If
you had stolen a pencil from the library by
accident,
just put it in your pocket without even thinking
that it might be yours or it might be somebody
else's left laying on the table there, and a police
officer stops you at the door and starts with all
this warning,
what are you going to tell them? He ain't going to
listen to nothing until he gets you to jail. The
jail lieutenant tells you the same thing again.
And the jail lieutenant ain't going to say nothing
until he gets the corporation court judge down
there and he gives you the warning again.
By that time, you're a little bit pissed off about
that damn pencil. And then the next day, when the
detective gets you out to ask you about what caused
the offense to you being in the jail, and he gives
you the warning and writes it down again on what
time you were given the warning by who, are you
going to be eager to tell him? I don't think so.
Yeah, it hinders law or justice.
How does a hindrance balance out with any possible
benefit? Can you name me one benefit? What's
stated a lot is it protects the individual from...
Anything
you say can and may be used against you. If you are
unable to obtain an attorney of your choice, an
attorney will be furnished. I don't agree with any
one of those. What about the search restrictions?
That's a different one altogether.
The Constitution of the United States comes along
there under one of the laws or one of the
amendments, that you shall be secure in your
person against all unreasonable searches or
seizures. The word that brings into question is
unreasonable. If it's a reasonable search or a
reasonable seizure, I believe it should be
ineffective.
Just like I pointed out a while ago, if you've got a
car going down the street at 2.30 in the morning,
two old boys sitting in the front end of it, and the
back end of it dragging the ground,
I believe you've got cause for reasonable search
for that vehicle. But as things stand today, no
court in the land would oppose
it. Reasonable seems to be pretty subjective. It
is. How can you establish something that could be
consistent? I'm not a lawyer. I can't. All I can
tell you is what's reasonable in my way of thinking
and why I think that. And if by virtue of being a
policeman on the beat for 12 years, 5 years, or 20
years, you have a reasonable cause to believe that
a stolen TV is in the back end of that car.
Or that a motor from another car is stuck in the back
end of that. That should be grabbed for stopping
and
searching. You're not accusing the people of
anything until you find something that is out of
line. And then I believe it becomes incumbent on
them to prove that
they're not. When did the Fort Worth Police
Department start making you read Miranda
and restricting your activities and searches?
I couldn't even say I don't even know. Well, the
court started in 66. I'm just curious how long it
took to put it. You came to work one day and they
said, all right, this is what we're going to do. Oh,
no. It would be a gradual buildup and an
overreaction to whatever the actual decision
was. It always is.
They overreact to it in such a way as to protect
themselves. Then as the decision comes out and
becomes more understood, more widely read, then
adjustments are made to ease the restrictions
that you've been placed under.
Okay. Let's see. We may have already discussed
this. We'll try again. The rights of the accused
are very strong in the U.S. Miranda, right to
counsel, tendency of judges to throw out cases on
technicalities.
How much more difficult do these make police work?
It makes the police work a lot more difficult.
It increases the paperwork.
No, I didn't say how
much. And it reduces
the amount of police work because so much time has
to be spent on paperwork justifying what you did.
Or explaining that you went right down the line at
8.05, at 8.06, at 8.08. So will my fish.
Can you give an example? Yeah, any examples? I
mean, out of your own experience or just thinking
of it? Either good or bad, of increased awareness
for the individual and the responsibility of the
police to recognize and respect, at least in the
court's opinion, Yeah, that was a bad question.
Any example, can you give any examples from your
own experience of the effects of these, either
good or bad effects of other, you've already given
some, so this is kind of a repetitious question.
Well,
When I was assigned to the Texas office burglary
section, well before any of this
had come into being,
at that time we had approximately
a 25% clearance rate of all burglaries that were
reported, with about a 19% recovery of all
burglary losses.
I'm
not thoroughly familiar with what the
percentages would be now. I doubt they would be
anywhere near there.
And I believe it's
almost strictly
attributable to the fact
that so much more extensive paperwork is required
that
less cases can be worked by the detective. He has
less time. If one case takes him two or three days
paperwork,
and he's getting five or six cases assigned to him a
day, something's gotta slide.
What was the perception of the policeman of the
flower children? I don't know if you want to
distinguish between flower children and hippies
or whether you get all the same. Were they a minor
problem or was it...
Try to think back now. We didn't have any...
First, we had our black minority groups.
And while they were gone, we had what we more or less
called the flower children. They were
groups.
And then later on came what would be termed
hippies.
There were more or less several years in between.
The Flower Children, they
formed groups.